# Chunk 8 - English

**Article ID:** p596

---

#### Rule 9—Your Qualifying Child Cannot Be Used by More Than One Person To Claim the EIC
Sometimes a child meets the tests to be a qualifying child of more than one person. However, only one of these persons can actually treat the child as a qualifying child. Only that person can use the child as a qualifying child to take all of the following tax benefits (provided the person is eligible for each benefit).
  1. The child tax credit, credit for other dependents, or additional child tax credit.
  2. Head of household filing status. 
  3. The credit for child and dependent care expenses.
  4. The exclusion for dependent care benefits.
  5. The EIC.
The other person can’t take any of these benefits based on this qualifying child. In other words, you and the other person can’t agree to divide these tax benefits between you. The other person can’t take any of these tax benefits unless that person has a different qualifying child. 
The tiebreaker rules, which follow, explain who, if anyone, can claim the EIC when more than one person has the same qualifying child. However, the tiebreaker rules don't apply if the other person is your spouse and you file a joint return.
**Tiebreaker rules.**
To determine which person can treat the child as a qualifying child to claim the five tax benefits just listed, the following tiebreaker rules apply. For purposes of these tiebreaker rules, the term “parent” means a biological or adoptive parent of an individual. It does not include a stepparent or foster parent unless that person has adopted the individual.
  * If only one of the persons is the child's parent, the child is treated as the qualifying child of the parent.
  * If the parents file a joint return together and can claim the child as a qualifying child, the child is treated as the qualifying child of the parents.
  * If the parents don't file a joint return together but both parents claim the child as a qualifying child, the IRS will treat the child as the qualifying child of the parent with whom the child lived for the longer period of time during the year. If the child lived with each parent for the same amount of time, the IRS will treat the child as the qualifying child of the parent who had the higher AGI for the year.
  * If no parent can claim the child as a qualifying child, the child is treated as the qualifying child of the person who had the highest AGI for the year.
  * If a parent can claim the child as a qualifying child but no parent claims the child, the child is treated as the qualifying child of the person who had the highest AGI for the year, but only if that person's AGI is higher than the highest AGI of any of the child's parents who can claim the child.
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and the other person may be able to choose which of you claims the child as a qualifying child. See Examples 1 through 12.
If you can’t claim the EIC because your qualifying child is treated under the tiebreaker rules as the qualifying child of another person for 2024, you may be able to take the EIC using a different qualifying child, or take the EIC using the rules in chapter 3 for people who don't have a qualifying child.
**If the other person cannot claim the EIC.**
If you and someone else have the same qualifying child but the other person can’t claim the EIC because the other person isn't eligible or their earned income or AGI is too high, you may be able to treat the child as a qualifying child. See Examples 6 and 7. But you can’t treat the child as a qualifying child to claim the EIC if the other person uses the child to claim any of the other five tax benefits listed earlier in this chapter.
**Examples.**
The following examples may help you in determining whether you can claim the EIC when you and someone else have the same qualifying child.
**Example 1—Child lived with parent and grandparent.**
You and your 2-year-old child Sam lived with your parent all year. You are 25 years old, unmarried, and your AGI is $9,000. Your only income was $9,000 from a part-time job. Your parent's only income was $22,000 from a job, and their AGI is $22,000. Your child’s other parent did not live with you or Sam. The special rule explained later for divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) doesn't apply. Sam is a qualifying child of both you and your parent because Sam meets the relationship, age, residency, and joint return tests for both you and your parent. However, only one of you can treat Sam as a qualifying child to claim the EIC (and the other tax benefits listed earlier in this chapter for which that person qualifies). Sam isn't a qualifying child of anyone else, including the child’s other parent. If you don't claim Sam as a qualifying child for the EIC or any of the other tax benefits listed earlier, your parent can treat Sam as a qualifying child to claim the EIC (and any of the other tax benefits listed earlier for which your parent qualifies).
**Example 2—Parent has higher AGI than grandparent.**
The facts are the same as in _Example 1_ except your AGI is $25,000. Because your parent's AGI isn't higher than yours, your parent can’t claim Sam as a qualifying child. Only you can claim Sam.
**Example 3—Two persons claim same child.**
The facts are the same as in _Example 1_ except that you and your parent both claim Sam as a qualifying child. In this case, you as the child's parent will be the only one allowed to claim Sam as a qualifying child for the EIC and the other tax benefits listed earlier for which you qualify. The IRS will disallow your parent's claim to the EIC and any of the other tax benefits listed earlier based on Sam. Your parent can't take the EIC for a taxpayer without a qualifying child because your parent’s AGI is more than $18,591.
**Example 4—Qualifying children split between two persons.**
The facts are the same as in _Example 1_ except that you also have two other young children who are qualifying children of both you and your parent. Only one of you can claim each child. However, if your parent's AGI is higher than yours, you can allow your parent to claim one or more of the children. For example, if you claim one child, your parent can claim the other two.
**Example 5—Taxpayer who is a qualifying child.**
The facts are the same as in _Example 1_ except that you are only 18 years old. This means you are a qualifying child of your parent. Because of _Rule 10_ , discussed next, you can’t claim the EIC and can’t claim Sam as a qualifying child. Only your parent may be able to treat Sam as a qualifying child to claim the EIC. If your parent meets all the other requirements for claiming the EIC and you don't claim Sam as a qualifying child for any of the other tax benefits listed earlier, your parent can claim both you and Sam as qualifying children for the EIC.
**Example 6—Grandparent with too much earned income to claim EIC.**
The facts are the same as in _Example 1_ except that your parent earned $50,000 from employment. Because your parent's earned income is too high for your parent to claim the EIC, only you can claim the EIC using Sam.
**Example 7—Parent with too much earned income to claim EIC.**
The facts are the same as in _Example 1_ except that you earned $50,000 from your job and your AGI is $50,500. Your earned income is too high for you to claim the EIC. But your parent can’t claim the EIC either, because your parent’s AGI isn't higher than yours.
**Example 8—Separated parents.**
You, your spouse, and your 10-year-old child, Jordan, lived together until August 1, 2024, when your spouse moved out of the household. In August and September, Jordan lived with you. For the rest of the year, Jordan lived with Jordan's other parent. Jordan is a qualifying child of both you and your spouse because Jordan lived with each of you for more than half the year and because Jordan met the relationship, age, and joint return tests for both of you. At the end of the year, you and your spouse still weren't divorced, legally separated, or separated under a written separation agreement, so the _Special rule for divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart)_.") doesn't apply. 
You and your spouse will file separate returns. Your spouse agrees to let you treat Jordan as a qualifying child. This means, if your spouse doesn't claim Jordan as a qualifying child for any of the tax benefits listed earlier, you can claim Jordan as a qualifying child for any tax benefit listed earlier for which you qualify. However, you can't take the EIC because you and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 2024 and, while you did live apart at the end of 2024, you aren't legally separated under a written separation agreement or decree of separate maintenance. Therefore, you don't meet the requirements for certain separated spouses to take the EIC when they don’t file a joint return. See Rule 3. You also can't take the credit for child and dependent care expenses because your filing status is married filing separately and you and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 2024. See Pub. 503.
**Example 9—Separated parents claim same child.**
The facts are the same as in _Example 8_ , except that you and your spouse both claim Jordan as a qualifying child. In this case, only your spouse will be allowed to treat Jordan as a qualifying child. This is because, during 2024, Jordan lived with your spouse longer than with you. You can’t claim the EIC because you are a separated spouse who isn’t filing a joint return and you don’t have a qualifying child. However, your spouse's filing status is also married filing separately, so your spouse can’t claim the EIC because you and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 2024 or you aren't legally separated under a written separation agreement or decree of separate maintenance. Therefore, your spouse doesn't meet the requirements to claim the EIC as a separated spouse who isn’t filing a joint return. See Rule 3. Your spouse also can't take the credit for child and dependent care expenses because your spouse’s filing status is married filing separately and you and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 2024. See Pub. 503.
**Example 10—Unmarried parents.**
You, your 5-year-old child, Logan, and Logan’s other parent lived together all year. You and Logan’s other parent aren't married. Logan is a qualifying child of both you and Logan’s other parent because Logan meets the relationship, age, residency, and joint return tests for both you and Logan’s other parent. Your earned income and AGI are $12,000, and Logan’s other parent’s earned income and AGI are $14,000. Neither of you had any other income. Logan’s other parent agrees to let you treat the child as a qualifying child. This means if Logan’s other parent doesn't claim Logan as a qualifying child for the EIC or any of the other tax benefits listed earlier, you can claim Logan as a qualifying child for the EIC and any of the other tax benefits listed earlier for which you qualify.
**Example 11—Unmarried parents claim same child.**
The facts are the same as in _Example 10_ except that you and Logan’s other parent both claim Logan as a qualifying child. In this case, only Logan’s other parent will be allowed to treat Logan as a qualifying child. This is because Logan’s other parent’s AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI, $12,000. You can claim the EIC without a qualifying child.
**Example 12—Child did not live with a parent.**
You and your sibling’s child, Morgan, lived with your parent all year. You are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Your only income was from a part-time job. Your parent’s AGI is $15,000. Your parent’s only income was from a job. Morgan’s parents file jointly, have an AGI of less than $9,000, and don't live with you or Morgan. Morgan is a qualifying child of both you and your parent because Morgan meets the relationship, age, residency, and joint return tests for both you and your parent. However, only your parent can treat Morgan as a qualifying child. This is because your parent’s AGI, $15,000, is more than your AGI, $9,300.
**Special rule for divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart).**
A child will be treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent if all of the following statements are true.
  1. The parents:
    1. Are divorced or legally separated under a decree of divorce or separate maintenance;
    2. Are separated under a written separation agreement; or
    3. Lived apart at all times during the last 6 months of 2024.
  2. The child received over half of the child’s support for the year from the parents.
  3. The child is in the custody of one or both parents for more than half of 2024.
  4. Either of the following statements is true.
    1. The custodial parent signs Form 8332 or a substantially similar statement that the custodial parent will not claim the child as a dependent for the year, and the noncustodial parent attaches the form or statement to their return. If the divorce decree or separation agreement went into effect after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial parent may be able to attach certain pages from the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. 
    2. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or separate maintenance or written separation agreement that applies to 2024 provides that the noncustodial parent can claim the child as a dependent, and the noncustodial parent provides at least $600 for support of the child during 2024.
For details, see Pub. 501. If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent under this special rule for children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), only the noncustodial parent can claim the child tax credit or the credit for other dependents for the child. However, only the custodial parent, if eligible, or another eligible taxpayer can claim the child as a qualifying child for the EIC. For details and examples, see _Applying the tiebreaker rules to divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart)_ in Pub. 501.